# VR_FPS_EEG_DDA
This study uses dynamic difficulty adjustment (DDA) from Electroencephalography (EEG) input in order to increase engagement period. using Muse EEG headset

Dynamic difficulty adjustment with EEG as a tool for optimizing engagement
Abstract:
This study uses dynamic difficulty adjustment (DDA) from Electroencephalography (EEG) input in order to increase engagement period.
Introduction:
Electroencephalography (EEG) is a noninvasive method for investigating brain activity. It measures the change in brain activity in real time and for personal use[1]. The frequency bands are; δ (1–4 Hz), θ (5–8 Hz), α (9–13 Hz), β (12–30 Hz) and γ (30–50 Hz).
Engagement is defined as the effortful concentration and striving towards task goals where task demands and personal characteristics may influence this pattern of processing[3]. Task engagement index (TEI) is measured from EEG as β/(α + θ)[4, 5].
Dynamic difficulty adjustment (DDA) is a method of automatically modifying a game’s features, behaviors, and scenarios in real-time, depending on the player’s skill, so that the player, when the game is very simple, does not feel bored or frustrated, when the game is easy or difficult[6-9].
Virtual reality (VR) is the simulation of a real environment generated by a computer software and experienced by the user through a human–machine interface[10].
Previous studies showed; DDA and FNIRS can improve navigation skills[11]. DDA and EEG in video games can increase engagement[12]. VR and EEG feelings accuracy [13] This study shows a combination of EEG,DDA and VR, hypothesizing that DDA would increase TEI.
Methods:
TEI was calculated from EEG input that was measured with MUSE EEG system (InterAxon Inc.)[14] from the average of frontal lobe electrodes’ Fp1 and Fp2[15].
Intra study sectioned to two parts that were randomly ordered; A. Control (no DDA) - 6 minutes playing while enemies respawn every 10 seconds. B. DDA - 1. 3 minutes low threshold set. 2. 3 minutes high threshold set. 3. 6 minutes playing while enemies spawn based on EEG input.
Fig1.Ball of light up the mountain is set as an in-game DDA adjustment indicator.

Participants played for 3 minutes to get to know the environment, platform and keys. Afterwards they were assigned the two study sections in a random order(AB or BA).
Percent of time engaged is calculated by the time TEI values between low and high thresholds divided by time[16]. Comparison is made between 6 minutes no-DDA and 6 minutes DDA sessions to determine engagement success.

Results:

Fig2. Percent of time engaged in DDA and no-DDA sessions.

Percent of time engaged in the DDA session was 77.6% (std=2.58%). Percent of time engaged in the no-DDA session was 51.2% (std=5.84%). Mann Whitney U test P value =0.008. Effect size Cohen’s d = 0.696.

Discussion:

The participants showed an increase in percent of time engaged while DDA was active. This increase of 26.4%(std=3.26%) on average confirms the hypothesis that DDA increases engagement period.

In contrast, the small sample size and the short trail length require taking the results with a grain of salt. There could be a number of factors that may affect the results. Factors such as: apathy to a familiar platform or game, age, race and more.
Mechanisms shown in this study can be used for physical therapy, adaptive learning, entertainment and workflow optimization.
Further studies could look into; other game genres (e.g  RPG,RTS,MOBA). Bigger sample size & variety. Verification of EEG signal with other headsets. Use of machine learning to make more accurate TEI. And incorporate additional biomarkers (e,g GSR,HR)





ACKNOWLEDGMENT:

Assets:
Oculus Integration
POLYGON Starter Pack - Low Poly 3D Art by Synty | 3D Props | Unity Asset Store
Simple FX - Cartoon Particles | VFX Particles | Unity Asset Store
GameDevChef Youtube Channel
Python:
BlueMuse
MuseLSL
Supervisor: Shahar Maidenbaum
Subjects: Alon,Gidon,Maayan,Dina, Ellie and me
Unity consulting: Yaniv
Equipment: Oleg

REFERENCES:

Lakshmi, M.R.; Prasad, T.V.; Prakash, V.C. Survey on EEG signal processing methods. Int. J. Adv. Res. Comput. Sci. Softw. Eng. 2014, 4, 84–91.
Sanei, S.; Chambers, J.A. EEG Signal Processing; John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.: Chichester, UK, 2007.
Matthews, G., Campbell, S. E., Falconer, S., Joyner, L. A., Huggins, J., Gilliland, K., Grier, R. and Warm, J. S. Fundamental Dimensions of Subjective State in Performance Settings: Task Engagement, Distress, and Worry. Emotion. 2002.
Prinzel, L. J., Freeman, F. G., Scerbo, M. W., Mikulka, P. J. and Pope, A. T. A Closed-Loop System for Examining Psychosiological Measures for Adaptive Task Allocation. International J. of Aviation Psychology, 10, 4. 393. 2000
A. Noon, A. Philippides, A. Thompson, Dynamic difficulty adjustment in games: a neuroevolutionary approach, Ph.D. thesis, Masters thesis, University of Sussex, East Sussex, England, 2009.
Freeman, F. G., Mikulka, P. J., Prinzel, L. J. and Scerbo, M. W. Evaluation of an adaptive automation system using three EEG indices with a visual tracking task. Biological Psychology, 50, 1. 61-76. 1999.
P. Spronck, I. Sprinkhuizen-Kuyper, E. Postma, Difficulty scaling of game ai, in: Proceedings of the 5th International Conference on Intelligent Games and Simulation (GAME-ON 2004), 2004, pp. 33–37.
P.H.M. Spronck, Adaptive Game AI, UPM, Universitaire Pers Maastricht, 2005.
H. Yu, T. Trawick, Personalized procedural content generation to minimize frustration and boredom based on ranking algorithm, in: AIIDE, 2011.
Holden MK. Virtual environments for motor rehabilitation: review. Cyber Psychol Behav. 2005;8:187–211.
Afergan, D., Peck, E. M., Solovey, E. T., Jenkins, A., Hincks, S. W., Brown, E. T., ... & Jacob, R. J. (2014, April). Dynamic difficulty using brain metrics of workload. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (pp. 3797-3806).
Stein, A.; Yotam, Y.; Puzis, R.; Shani, G. EEG-triggered dynamic difficulty adjustment for multiplayer games. Entertain Comput. 2018, 25, 14–25.
Paranthaman, P. K., Bajaj, N., Solovey, N., & Jennings, D. (2021, August). Comparative Evaluation of the EEG Performance Metrics and Player Ratings on the Virtual Reality Games. In 2021 IEEE Conference on Games (CoG) (pp. 1-8). IEEE.
http://www.choosemuse.com/
Fairclough, S. H., Moores, L. J., Ewing, K. C., & Roberts, J. (2009, September). Measuring task engagement as an input to physiological computing. In 2009 3rd international conference on affective computing and intelligent interaction and workshops (pp. 1-9). IEEE.
McMahan, T., Parberry, I., & Parsons, T. D. (2015). Evaluating player task engagement and arousal using electroencephalography. Procedia Manufacturing, 3, 2303-2310.
